## _The Catcher in the Rye_ by J. D. Salinger

### Synopsis

1. Holden, who is sixteen, talks about Pencey Prep, his preparatory school, how awful it was, its inaccurate ads about the motto, that school never moulds students and if a student is bright then he has always been that way, that he flunked in four subjects out of five passing only English, disliked games, he was the manager of the fencing team, the inability to see girls but how she saw the headmaster's daughter and once sat next to her conversating, that he plans on leaving school as he already flunked.
2. Holden visits Old Spencer (History teacher) and his wife to say goodbye for leaving the school, tells him his parents were yet to hear the news and would probably get irritated as he had gone to four schools already. Spencer said he flunked him as he knew absolutely nothing and he said that three times driving Holden crazy. Then he showed the exam paper he wrote reading out loud (comedic writing), asked him if he was concerned about his future. Holden assures him he is and says goodbye. As he moved out of the house, he seems to hear Spencer yelling at him 'Good luck!' much to his displeasure as he thinks it's terrible.
3. Holden tells about Robert Ackley, two years his senior who lives the next room, that everybody calls him Ackley, he visits rooms on purpose and pretends visiting it by mistake, that he always makes things be said twice, that he always sits on the arm of chairs and never on the chair itself, he hates people's guts and hence he never like to see Stradlater due to his guts but keeps track of what he is dating, and he is full of pimples, lousy teeth crumby fingernails. He has never seem Ackley brush his teeth once. Holden seems to dislike him, and says he never try to pay attention to him. Ackley visits him, sees the picture of Sally Hayes, a girl Holden used to hang out with in New York.
4. Stradlater is Holden's roommate at Pencey Prep. Stradlater is handsome, self-satisfied, and popular, but Holden calls him a “secret slob,” because he appears well groomed, but his toiletries, such as his razor, are disgustingly unclean. Stradlater asks Holden to write a descriptive composition for him which Holden finds funny as someone who flunks in four subjects. Holden asks him who his date is if its not Fitzgerald, then learns from him that it was Jane Gallagher who once lived with Holden in the next door and he instantly grew so excited. He tells Stradlater that she is a dancer, practises two hours a day, that he used to play checkers with her, tells him about her parents who divorced and other stories about her. Holden asks him not to tell her that he flunked.
5. Holden has no date. So he asks Mal, his friend, about going to the movies, also asks if bringing Ackley was okay. Reaching dorm, he yells at Ackley's door about the movies. They all go but Holden dislikes them as they laugh like hyenas at things that are not even funny. Holden describes Ackley to be talkative, that he says a lot about girls he was supposed to have sex with last summer. Holden says Ackley is the only virgin of all he has seen. Holden decides to write Stradlater's composition describing his late brother Allie's baseball glove who was two years younger than him but fifty times more intelligent, that he was really nice and good natured, being the exception to the rule that red-haired people are short-tempered and how teachers wrote letters to his mother saying how lucky they were to have him at school. Holden slept in the same garage the night Allie died, and tried to break all the windows there due to the shock he felt at his brother's death. In the composition, Holden changes Allie's name.
6. Stradlater asks Holden if he has finished the composition. Stradlater dislikes it as it was about a baseball glove not about a house or something and Holden instantly tears it apart into pieces. He asks him about his date. Stradlater says he dates her, but doesn't hang about in New York rather borrows Ed Banky's car and stay together  inside it. Holden keeps on smoking as it is prohibited inside dorm and also because Stradlater hates it and he hates him. He calls him a moron and begins to hit him. He says he is a moron because he even doesn't know her date's name. He says it is Jane not Jean. The more he calls him a moron, the more Stradlater grows angry. They fight a bit. After that, Holden describes himself as not too tough though the blood on the nose makes him look like tough.
7. Holden visits Ackley. He is asked why he fights with his roommate, he never answers because he thinks Ackley is stupider than even Stradlater. He is asked the same question like fifteen times, suddenly he starts feeling lonesome. He knew Stradlater. Boys at Pencey talk about having sex with girls like Ackley but Stradlater actually does. He remembers a double-date he had with him inside Ed Banky's car and how Stradlater sat at the back and used his technique of snoring. Holden personally knows at least two girls whom he had already had sex with. Suddenly he feels so lonesome, plans on leaving Pencey that very night, staying in a very inexpensive hotel in New York for the next few days. He couldn't stop thinking about Jane and Stradlater and every time he remembers Ed Banky's car he wants to jump out of the window. All the thoughts about his parents, granny, flunking the school and most especially Jane make him so depressed that he wants to die. He begins to cry not knowing why. Then he packs up all his things, leaves his dorm sad, but for the last time he looks at the godamn corridor and yells "Sleep tight, ya morons!"
8. Holden walks the whole way to station as it was late to find a cab, waits 10 mins for the train, washes his face with the snow. Usually he likes traveling in a train at night with lights on and he would like to buy sandwich and four magazines and read them but this day is different, all he does what take out his hat and put it in his pocket. He is alone as it is late, but suddenly a woman comes in, sits next to him, sees the Pencey sticker in his suitcase, asks him if he goes to Pencey. Holden says she has a nice voice, was nice and good. She says her son, Ernest also goes to Pencey. When asked about him, Holden says his name is Rudolf, actually the name of the janitor of the dorm, then he tells Mrs. Morrow about her son, that he is too shy and modest that he does not allow his friends to nominate him to be the president of the class. She then asks him (much to Holden's fear) if there is an illness in the family as he is moving out before Christmas, he lies about having a tumor in the brain and he's to have a operation to remove it. Mrs. Morrow is nice, gentle and caring that Holden wishes he shouldn't have lied about his name and all. He suddenly starts reading a timetable in his pocket not to continue lying. But then he is invited to visit Ernest next summer but he thanks her saying he couldn't make it as he has to go to South America with granny which is another big lie as his granny rarely leaves his house.
9. When Holden gets off the train, he goes to a phone booth wanting to give somebody a buzz but couldn't think of anyone. Each one seems to have a trouble, so he decides not to. He gets a cab and gets to a hotel where he won't run into acquantances, but the hotel seems to have a lot of perverts like a man in a woman's dress or a man and a woman squirting water to each other's faces. He sits down but soon begins to feel horny, remembers a Princeton guy who once gave him the address of a girl, Faith Cavendish, who is not actually a whore but would give it once in a while. He rings her but is told that it is very late. Holden describes the girl to be a kind of rough comparing her to a tigress on phone.
10. Holden changes his shirt, thinks about giving her ten-years old sister Phoebe a phone call, fears his mother would pick up. He describes Phoebe to be a smart one. In fact, he thinks he is the only dumb one in the family. Then he goes to Lavender Room nearby and tries to drink alcohol feigning himself to be more than 21 years old. He meets three not-so-pretty girls whom he describes as three morons. He tries to talk to them but all of them seems so dumb and moronic. He dances with each of them and has a lot of fun while kidding with them (comedic scene).
11. Holden remembers about Jane Gallagher. He spent a lot of time one summer, when their families stayed in neighboring summer houses in Maine. She is one of the few girls whom he both respects and finds attractive. He remembers the time he spent with her and how he thinks she's pretty though his mother would disagree on that point.
12. Holden gets a cab and talks with the driver. He finds himself lonesome and depressed, he could see men and women walking in streets with hands around each other's waists and guys going out with their dates. He meets a girl named Lilian with her date who asks him about his brother D. B. and Holden says he is doing fine in Hollywood. Lilian is quite pleased with it but he tries to finish the conversation as soon as possible because he dislikes both of them.
13. Holden meets Maurice, the elevator boy while he is feeling depressed inside the elevator. He is asked to enjoy a bit that night, that he could send him a girl and pay her for it. Holden agrees, reaches his room and thinks about his sex life. He is still a virgin though he has already got a lot of opportunities to have sex with but something always comes up in the way. The thing is when he tries to have sex with a non-prostitute he will be told to stop and he will. Most guys don't. And he will regret stopping it. Suddenly a girl arrives in his room. She looks young just like him, she has no interest in knowing him or what he does, she only removes his clothes and he says he will pay but probably won't do it because he is not in the mood. He is more depressed than horny.
14. Holden wants to sleep after praying or something but the thing is he is an atheist. He likes Jesus but dislikes the other things in the Bible. Shortly after he is knocked at the door, he opens it to find Sunny, the whore and Maurice. They demand to give five more bucks for the night, it is a kind of bargaining thing, but Maurice forcibly takes the money after Sunny tells him where his wallet is. Holden, already crying, calls him a moron and Maurice beats him. After that he sleeps.
15. Holden is getting lonesome and hungry. He calls Sally Hayes on phone asking for a date, sets the meeting place and leaves his hotel room to get something to eat. It's Sunday, and he has to get to his home on Wednesday when the school vacation starts. While eating he meets two nuns who ask him for a contribution. He gives it but to his surprise, finds one of them is pretty interested in Romeo and Juilet. They talk a while about it although Holden, as usual, is not quite interested in it.
16. Holden finishes his breakfast. It is still early for the date. He keeps thinking about the two nuns he met, then about his sister Phoebe. He buys a song record for her, it costs him five bucks, then he gives Jane a phone call only to get her mother pick up and so he hangs up as he doesn't like talking to girls' mothers. He goes to the park and sees the Mall, he feels like going inside as he used to with her sister, he meets some girls her age and he asks one if she knew Phoebe introducing himself as her brother. The girl tell him she knows Phoebe and she is probably in the museum. Holden knows what mesuem she meant, he has visited it many times with Phoebe, so he enters it and remembers all the good times he had with his sister. He seems to be missing his childhood, he walks into a children's playground but finds the children wanting him to leave and so he leaves.
17. Holden awaits Sally. He sees a lot of different types of girls waiting for their dates and it is a kind of depressing to him to think how they all would end up marrying dopes. He meets Sally, both goes to see a show and then meets a guy Sally once met, they both have a conversation. Sally's idea is to go for skating, so they do. Holden thinks they are the worst skaters there, he talks to Sally, says sweet things to her like the only reason that keeps him in New York is her as everything else is a bore, that he has 180 bucks in the bank and he can get a job, so he wants to marry her and all but Sally is not convinced as she keeps telling him they would starve if he can't get his job before his money just run over. They start to argue on some points until Holden suddenly call her "a royal pain in the ass" which makes her cry. He starts apologizing like a madman only to be in vain. All these are a sort of funny thing to Holden that he begins to laugh stupidly which he describes if he is laughing this way in a movie show or something he would lean over and tell himself to stop. This makes Sally madder than ever. She tells him to leave her alone and he does it.
18. Holden feels like there is plenty of time left in the evening and thinks about what he shall do. He feels like giving Jane a phone call but it is not answered. He opens his address book and find only three people there. He calls Carl Luce, a smart senior guy who possess one of the highest I. Q.'s at school and who is now at Columbia and he feels like having a somewhat intellectual conversation with him. He calls him and arranges to meet. He also thinks about movie shows and wars, then novels he used to like and all.
19. Holden meets Luce. He describes Luce to be highly intellectual who never says Hello when he meets people but always says he has a couple of minutes to talk. Holden asks him about his sex life, Luce never responds. Then Holden asks if he is still with the girl he used to be with at school. Luce says no but rather he is now with a Chinese girl from Shanghai and he likes Eastern philosophy because they regard sex as both a physical and spiritual thing. Holden tries to talk with him more about sex life, also describing Luce as someone who loses virginity at age 14 and as someone who knows a bit about sex. Luce seems to know a lot about perverts too. Holden tries to have an intellectual conversation with him only to find himself vastly outweighted by Luce's intelligence. As Luce leaves, Holden says he has a lot of vocabulary in his sleeve and he is probably the one with the largest vocabulary he has ever met.
20. Holden is quite drunked. He phoned Sally to say he will be coming to trim her tree on Christmas Eve. She hangs up the phone knowing he is quite drunked. He walks in the Central Park. It is quite cold and he is shivering. Accidentally the record he bought is dropped and breaks into somewhat like fifty pieces. He just picks all of them up not wanting to just throw away. He imagines getting pneumonia in the cold and dying and how it will do for Phoebe. He even feels sorry for his parents especially his mother because she is not over Allie's death yet. He knows Phoebe is also quite fond of him. Suddenly he wants to see Phoebe. He plans to enter his house only to see her and to avoid his parents from seeing him, he wants to tell him about his future plans.
21. Holden gets into Phoebe's room only to find it empty. He remembers that she likes D.B.'s room because it is big and so he goes there to find Phoebe sleeping. He wakes her up, asks about their parents and all. Phoebe says they won't be home until very late. She expresses joy in seeing him. He says about the record he bought for her but broke in the way. Phoebe takes all the pieces and then she asks why he is home early, before Wednesday. She deduces he is expelled and gets angry telling their father is going to kill him if he hears the news. Holden says it is all right and he will get a job and meanwhile they will keep in touch.
22. Phoebe asks him why he is expelled and deduces he fails in all subjects. Holden says she is wrong, he passes in English. He says all those things he hate about school, all those phonies and morons. Phoebe criticizes he is aimless and dislikes everything he meet in life, and asks him to name anything he likes. After much thought he says he heard a song "if a body catch a body coming through the rye" but Phoebe says it is wrong it should be "if a body meet a body coming through the rye" and that it is a poem by Robert Burns. Holden says he likes to be with many children who are playing in a rye field near the edge of a cliff, that if a child, by mistake, falls off the cliff he has to catch him, and that's his job all day - to be a catcher in the rye. He says he would be pleased to spend all his day in this way. After that he thinks about his former teacher Antolini who is now at New York University and now he wishes to talk to him again.
23. Holden describes Antolini to be about the best teacher he ever had. He is not much older than D. B. and so Holden can fun around him without losing his respect for him. He dances a while with Phoebe and tries to leave his apartment. His parents arrive and Phoebe does everything she could to rid her mother without letting her suppose his son is back home. Then Holden says he will keep in touch with her and then he leaves.
24. Holden meets Mr. and Mrs. Antolini. He says a bit about school and how he dislikes it. Antolini says he is now at a crucial point and he has to realize that he needs to find out what he really likes to do and that when he finds out he has to apply for school again because he is still a student. Antolini is serious in his words concerning about Holden's future though he is quite funny at times. He says education is important because an educated scholar who is brilliant is likely to contribute more to the world than another similarly brilliant one without scholarly education. He arranges Holden's bed to sleep. Holden then finds Antolini patting his head while he is sleeping and interprets it as a homosexual advance. He quickly gives excuse that he can't sleep there anymore and that he has to take his money he left at the station. So he thanked Antolini and left his house.
25. Holden feels very much depressed thinking about Antolini and all. He thinks about heading to the west and live somewhere where nobody knows him, he wants to work as a gas man putting petrol and all inside people's cars. He wants to pretend to be deaf-mute so that people will write in a piece of paper to communicate with him. He wants to marry a deaf-mute if he has to. All these thoughts excite him and he decides to do it. He wants to say goodbye to Phoebe. He thinks about writing a letter to her to meet her and giving it to somebody at her school who knows her. So he writes the letter and goes to her school (he used to go to the same school) but then he sees a "Fuck you" in the wall, he is depressed and annoyed what the children will be when they learn the meaning of those words. He rubbed it off and entered the Principal's room to find a old woman at typewriter, he gives the note but as he moves out, she yells at him "Good Luck!" just the way Old Spencer did before he left Pencey Prep. He feels terrible. He talks to some children he meets there, he awaits Phoebe. After a while he sees her, she has brought a bag containing her clothes and she says she's coming with him. They argue then she becomes pretty sore. They see a zoo and then see a children's park. Phoebe suddenly kisses him, he gets tickets for her to ride, she rides and Holden rejoices at the sight, he feels like all his depressing thoughts are gone. It rains and rains heavily. Everyone rushes inside. Phoebe still rides, Holden still watches her with his clothes all wet, he simply can't miss the joy.
26. Epilogue: Holden narrates how he got back home. He caught T. B. and was treated for the illness. When he is asked whether he would apply to a school or not, he thinks that is a stupid question because who will know before actually doing it. He meets D. B. and all. He starts missing everybody, Stradlater, Ackley and even Maurice. In the end, he warns the readers not to tell anybody anything because it will lead to miss everybody we told about.
